The algal bloom break out after the sudden and discrete climate event (e.g., storm event, tropical cyclone, and circulation), mostly due to the nutrient-enriched inflow during the event.

A Medicane Significantly Increased Chlorophyll Concentrations;
Chlorophyll concentrations increased in 99.6% of the study area.
In 10.7% of the area, chlorophyll more than doubled after the medicane.
60.9% of the area experienced chlorophyll increases of over 50%​environsciproc-26-00192.
Comparison with Hurricanes;
The area-averaged chlorophyll increase was 64.2%, comparable to those observed in oligotrophic waters after hurricanes in the Atlantic.
Although medicanes are smaller in scale than hurricanes, they produce similar effects on phytoplankton growth​environsciproc-26-00192.
Sea Surface Temperature (SST) Drop as a Trigger;
SST dropped by over 2°C in 74.6% of the area after the medicane, with an average decrease of 2.54°C.
The largest SST drop observed in hurricanes over the oligotrophic Atlantic was 2.6°C, suggesting that similar mechanisms (upwelling, vertical mixing, and mixed layer deepening) are responsible for the chlorophyll increases​environsciproc-26-00192.
Mechanisms Behind Chlorophyll Increases;
Upwelling and vertical mixing caused by the medicane transported nutrients from deep waters to the surface.
This nutrient injection stimulated phytoplankton growth, leading to increased chlorophyll levels.
The strongest chlorophyll increases were observed 5 days after the event​environsciproc-26-00192.



Nutrient concentrations were runoff-mediated and determined by watershed inputs and, in some cases, by internal cycling depending on hydrology and temperature. Ammonium and phosphate were relatively enriched in February-March (a transitional period from dry/cold to wet/hot climate), which can be ascribed to initial flushing runoff from human/animal waste and spring fertilizer use. A phytoplankton bloom (mainly Chlorophyta) occurred during April after a surge of water temperature, probably due to the higher availability of inorganic nutrients and sunlight and suitable hydraulic residence time (medium flow) in the transitional period. The concentration of phytoplankton was low during May-June (wet-hot climate) when the concentrations of total suspended matter (TSM) were highest, likely owing to the "shading" effect of TSM and turbulence of high flow conditions. Nutrient-algae shifts across the dry-wet season and vertical profiles suggested that algal blooms seem to be fueled primarily by phosphate and ammonium rather than nitrate.

Chlorophyll concentrations exhibit seasonal variations, often being higher during dry seasons when water residence time increases, allowing for greater phytoplankton growth​